feat(v2): new logging module (#1435)
aws-powertools/powertools-lambda-java: docs/core/logging.md

Logging provides an opinionated logger with output structured as JSON.

## Key features

> * Leverages standard logging libraries: _SLF4J_ as the API, and _log4j2_ or _logback_ for the implementation

Reviewer: Link to each of these libraries?

> * Leverages standard logging libraries: _SLF4J_ as the API, and _log4j2_ or _logback_ for the implementation

Author: ```suggestion
* Leverages standard logging libraries: [_SLF4J_](https://www.slf4j.org/){target="_blank"} as the API, and [_log4j2_](https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/){target="_blank"} or [_logback_](https://logback.qos.ch/){target="_blank"} for the implementation
```

> * Capture key fields from Lambda context, cold start and structures logging output as JSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Captures key fields from Lambda context, cold start and structures logging output as JSON
```

Reviewer: Finicky suggestions to make these all in the same voice

> * Log Lambda event when instructed, disabled by default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Logs Lambda event when requested (disabled by default)
```

> * Log Lambda response when instructed, disabled by default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Optionally logs Lambda response
```

> * Log sampling enables DEBUG log level for a percentage of requests (disabled by default)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Optionally supports log sampling by including a configurable percentage of DEBUG logs in logging output
```

    </build>
    ```

> === "Maven Java 1.8"

Reviewer: The satisfaction of seeing the Java 1.8 section disappear here is high

        }
        
        sourceCompatibility = 11
        targetCompatibility = 11
    ```

=== "logback"

    ```groovy hl_lines="3 11"
        plugins {
            id 'java'
            id 'io.freefair.aspectj.post-compile-weaving' version '8.1.0'
        }
        
        repositories {
            mavenCentral()
        }
        
        dependencies {
            aspect 'software.amazon.lambda:powertools-logging-logback:{{ powertools.version }}'
        }
        
        sourceCompatibility = 11
        targetCompatibility = 11
    ```

### Configuration

#### Main environment variables

The logging module requires two settings:

| Environment variable      | Setting           | Description                                                                                                 |
|---------------------------|-------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `POWERTOOLS_LOG_LEVEL`    | **Logging level** | Sets how verbose Logger should be. If not set, will use the [Logging configuration](#logging-configuration) |

> | `POWERTOOLS_SERVICE_NAME` | **Service**       | Sets service key that will be present across all log statements (Default is `service_undefined`)            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `POWERTOOLS_SERVICE_NAME` | **Service**       | Sets service key that will be included in all log statements (Default is `service_undefined`)            |
```

Here is an example using AWS Serverless Application Model (SAM):

=== "template.yaml"
``` yaml hl_lines="10 11"
Resources:
  PaymentFunction:
    Type: AWS::Serverless::Function
    Properties:
      MemorySize: 512
      Timeout: 20
      Runtime: java17
      Environment:
        Variables:
          POWERTOOLS_LOG_LEVEL: WARN
          POWERTOOLS_SERVICE_NAME: payment
```

There are some other environment variables which can be set to modify Logging's settings at a global scope:

| Environment variable            | Type     | Description                                                                                                             |  
|---------------------------------|----------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|  

> | `POWERTOOLS_LOGGER_SAMPLE_RATE` | float    | Configure the sampling rate to set the log level at `DEBUG`. See [sampling rage](#sampling-debug-logs)                  |  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `POWERTOOLS_LOGGER_SAMPLE_RATE` | float    | Configure the sampling rate at which `DEBUG` logs should be included. See [sampling rate](#sampling-debug-logs)                  |  
```

I do like "sampling **rage**", though

------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------

> **timestamp** | String | "2020-05-24 18:17:33,774" | Timestamp of actual log statement

Author: Yes I didn't really work on the doc, just renamed the fields while refactoring.

> **timestamp** | String | "2020-05-24 18:17:33,774" | Timestamp of actual log statement

Reviewer: We could say that for the V2 work in general, we get it going, and then we do the logging later. We're on a separate branch after all. This lowers the chance of redoing the docs before we're happy with it all . WDYT @jeromevdl ?

> **timestamp** | String | "2020-05-24 18:17:33,774" | Timestamp of actual log statement

Author: 1. Code
2. Draft a PR
3. Get reviews and fix the code to have it in good shape (final interfaces + 95% of the code OK)
4. Finalize the code
5. Update the doc
6. Mark PR as ready

    </Configuration>
    ```

=== "logback.xml"

    With logback, we leverage a custom [Encoder](https://logback.qos.ch/manual/encoders.html){target="_blank"} 
    to provide structured logging:

    ```xml hl_lines="4 5"
    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
    <configuration>
        <appender name="console" class="ch.qos.logback.core.ConsoleAppender">
            <encoder class="software.amazon.lambda.powertools.logging.LambdaJsonEncoder">
            </encoder>
        </appender>
        <logger name="com.example" level="DEBUG" additivity="false">
            <appender-ref ref="console" />
        </logger>
        <root level="INFO">
            <appender-ref ref="console" />
        </root>
    </configuration>
    ```

## Log level
Log level is generally configured in the `log4j2.xml` or `logback.xml`. But this level is static and needs a redeployment of the function to be changed.
Powertools for AWS Lambda permits to change this level dynamically thanks to an environment variable `POWERTOOLS_LOG_LEVEL`.

> We support the following log levels (SLF4J levels): `TRACE` (0), `DEBUG` (10), `INFO` (20), `WARN` (30), `ERROR` (40).

Reviewer: Do the numerical values of the enum matter?

Author: not sure...
```suggestion
We support the following log levels (SLF4J levels): `TRACE`, `DEBUG`, `INFO`, `WARN`, `ERROR`.
```

            // Logged as JSON
            LoggingUtils.logMessagesAsJson(true);
            LOGGER.debug("{}", JsonConfig.get().getObjectMapper().writeValueAsString(order));
            LoggingUtils.logMessagesAsJson(false);

            // ...
        }
    }
    ```

=== "Order.java"

    ```java 
    public class Order {
        private String id;
        private Date date;
        private Double amount;
    }
    ```

=== "Example CloudWatch Logs"

    ```json hl_lines="3 9-13"
	{
		"level": "DEBUG",
	  	"message": "{\"id\":\"435iuh2j3hb4\", \"date\":\"2023-12-01T14:48:59\", \"amount\":435.5}",
		"timestamp": "2023-12-01T14:49:19.293Z",
	  	"service": "payment",
	}
	{
		"level": "DEBUG",
	  	"message": {
            "id": "435iuh2j3hb4", 
            "date": "2023-12-01T14:48:59", 
            "amount":435.5
        },
		"timestamp": "2023-12-01T14:49:19.312Z",
	  	"service": "payment",
	}
    ```

You can also achieve this more broadly for all JSON messages (see advanced configuration for [log4j](#log-messages-as-json-1) & [logback](#log-messages-as-json-2)).

## Additional structured keys

### Logging Lambda context information

> The following keys will also be added to your structured logs (unless [configured otherwise](#more-customization-1)):

Reviewer: I think this link goes nowhere?
Also might be worth making it _super explicit_ that these keys are added to all logs emitted, until they are removed again. You mention it later on in "Logging additional keys" I think but it applies to everything in this section

Author: the link works...
```suggestion
The following keys will also be added to all your structured logs (unless [configured otherwise](#more-customization-1)):
```

|--------------------------|---------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| **cold_start**           | Boolean | false                                                                                  | ColdStart value                    |
| **function_name**        | String  | "example-PaymentFunction-1P1Z6B39FLU73"                                                | Name of the function               |
| **function_version**     | String  | "12"                                                                                   | Version of the function            |
| **function_memory_size** | String  | "512"                                                                                  | Memory configure for the function  |
| **function_arn**         | String  | "arn:aws:lambda:eu-west-1:012345678910:function:example-PaymentFunction-1P1Z6B39FLU73" | ARN of the function                |
| **function_request_id**  | String  | "899856cb-83d1-40d7-8611-9e78f15f32f4""                                                | AWS Request ID from lambda context |

### Logging incoming event

> When debugging in non-production environments, you can instruct the `@Logging` annotation to log the incoming event with `logEvent` param or via `POWERTOOLS_LOGGER_LOG_EVENT` env var.

Reviewer: Should we have some words in here (and maybe "Logging handler response") about what this means for a stream handler?

Author: what can we say?

        
        @Logging(logResponse = true)
        public APIGatewayProxyResponseEvent handleRequest(final APIGatewayProxyRequestEvent input, final Context context) {
            // ...
        }
    }
    ```

### Logging handler uncaught exception
By default, AWS Lambda logs any uncaught exception that might happen in the handler. However, this log is not structured
and does not contain any additional context. You can instruct the `@Logging` annotation to log this kind of exception 
with `logError` param or via `POWERTOOLS_LOGGER_LOG_ERROR` env var.

???+ warning
    This is disabled by default to prevent double logging

=== "AppLogResponse.java"

    ```java hl_lines="5"
    public class AppLogError implements RequestHandler<APIGatewayProxyRequestEvent, APIGatewayProxyResponseEvent> {
    
        private static final Logger LOGGER = LoggerFactory.getLogger(AppLogError.class);
        
        @Logging(logError = true)
        public APIGatewayProxyResponseEvent handleRequest(final APIGatewayProxyRequestEvent input, final Context context) {
            // ...
        }
    }
    ```

### Logging additional keys

> #### Logging a correlation ID

Reviewer: Worth mentioning where you'd expect to find the correlation ID? We had this chat the other day with the "why isn't it in the environment variable anymore?" thread

Author: not sure to understand...

Author: we reference the known correlation ids later...

Author: it's in the same chapter... a few lines below

You can set a correlation ID using the `correlationIdPath` attribute of the `@Logging`annotation,
by passing a [JMESPath expression](https://jmespath.org/tutorial.html){target="_blank"}, 
including our custom [JMESPath Functions](../utilities/serialization.md#built-in-functions).

> === "AppCorrelationId.java"

Reviewer: Might want to rename the second code blocks just below with the same names; as it stands, when you click through the tabs here, it moves both the active tab block you click on, plus the other tabs with the same names

Author: even with a different name, the tab changes, I don't know why...

Reviewer: Fixes it for me (ignore stupid names)

<img width="975" alt="Screenshot 2023-12-08 at 15 17 05" src="https://github.com/aws-powertools/powertools-lambda-java/assets/474021/dbd75d26-921d-46d4-8c24-bb7b128e47be">

	}
	```

=== "Example CloudWatch Logs"

    ```json hl_lines="6"
	{
		"level": "INFO",
	  	"message": "Collecting payment",
		"timestamp": "2023-12-01T14:49:19.293Z",
	  	"service": "payment",
	  	"correlation_id": "correlation_id_value"
	}
    ```

> ** setCorrelationId method**

Reviewer: Formatting broke

> ** setCorrelationId method**

Author: ```suggestion
**setCorrelationId method**
```

    
        private static final Logger LOGGER = LoggerFactory.getLogger(AppCorrelationId.class);
    
        @Logging
        public String handleRequest(final ScheduledEvent event, final Context context) {
            // ...
            LoggingUtils.setCorrelationId(event.getId());
            LOGGER.info("Scheduled Event")
            // ...
        }
    }
    ```

=== "Example Event"

	```json hl_lines="2"
    {
        "id": "cdc73f9d-aea9-11e3-9d5a-835b769c0d9c",
        "detail-type": "Scheduled Event",
        "source": "aws.events",
        "account": "123456789012",
        "time": "2023-12-01T14:49:19Z",
        "region": "us-east-1",
        "resources": [
            "arn:aws:events:us-east-1:123456789012:rule/ExampleRule"
        ],
        "detail": {}
    }
	```

=== "Example CloudWatch Logs"

    ```json hl_lines="6"
	{
		"level": "INFO",
	  	"message": "Scheduled Event",
		"timestamp": "2023-12-01T14:49:19.293Z",
	  	"service": "payment",
	  	"correlation_id": "cdc73f9d-aea9-11e3-9d5a-835b769c0d9c"
	}
    ```
???+ tip
    You can retrieve correlation IDs via `LoggingUtils.getCorrelationId()` method if needed.
 

> ** Known correlation IDs **

Author: ```suggestion
**Known correlation IDs**
```

    
        @Logging(clearState = true)
        public APIGatewayProxyResponseEvent handleRequest(final APIGatewayProxyRequestEvent input, final Context context) {
            // ...
            LoggingUtils.appendKey("cardNumber", card.getId());
            LOGGER.info("Updating card information");
            // ...
        }
    }
    ```

=== "#1 Request"

    ```json hl_lines="7"
    {
      "level": "INFO",
      "message": "Updating card information",
      "service": "card",
      "timestamp": "2023-12-01T14:49:19.293Z",
      "xray_trace_id": "1-6569f266-4b0c7f97280dcd8428d3c9b5",
      "cardNumber": "6818 8419 9395 5322"
    }
    ```

=== "#2 Request"

    ```json hl_lines="7"
    {
      "level": "INFO",
      "message": "Updating card information",
      "service": "card",
      "timestamp": "2023-12-01T14:49:20.213Z",
      "xray_trace_id": "2-7a518f43-5e9d2b1f6cfd5e8b3a4e1f9c",
      "cardNumber": "7201 6897 6685 3285"
    }
    ```

???+ tip "Additional keys are based on the MDC"
    `clearState` is based on `MDC.clear()`. State clearing is automatically done at the end of the execution of the handler if set to `true`.

# Advanced

## Sampling debug logs

> You can dynamically set a percentage of your logs to **DEBUG** level via env var `POWERTOOLS_LOGGER_SAMPLE_RATE` or

Reviewer: "You can dynamically set a percentage of your logs at **DEBUG** level to be included in the logger output ..." or so

Author: ```suggestion
You can dynamically set a percentage of your logs to`DEBUG` level to be included in the logger output, regardless of configured log leve, using the`POWERTOOLS_LOGGER_SAMPLE_RATE` environment variable or
```

| **API_GATEWAY_REST**          | `"requestContext.requestId"`        | API Gateway REST API request ID |
| **API_GATEWAY_HTTP**          | `"requestContext.requestId"`        | API Gateway HTTP API request ID |
| **APPSYNC_RESOLVER**          | `request.headers."x-amzn-trace-id"` | AppSync X-Ray Trace ID          |
| **APPLICATION_LOAD_BALANCER** | `headers."x-amzn-trace-id"`         | ALB X-Ray Trace ID              |
| **EVENT_BRIDGE**              | `"id"`                              | EventBridge Event ID            |

## Customising fields in logs

Powertools for AWS Lambda comes with default json structure ([standard fields](#standard-structured-keys) & [lambda context fields](#logging-lambda-context-information)).

You can go further and customize which fields you want to keep in your logs or not. The configuration varies according to the underlying logging library.

### Log4j2 configuration
Log4j2 configuration is done in _log4j2.xml_ and  leverages `JsonTemplateLayout`:

```xml
    <Console name="console" target="SYSTEM_OUT">
        <JsonTemplateLayout eventTemplateUri="classpath:LambdaJsonLayout.json" />
    </Console>
```

> The `JsonTemplateLayout` is configured with the provided template:

Reviewer: This isn't a call-for-action to the user, right, it's happening automatically?

Author: ```suggestion
The `JsonTemplateLayout` is automatically configured with the provided template:
```

            "field": "function_request_id"
        },
        "function_version": {
            "$resolver": "powertools",
            "field": "function_version"
        },
        "sampling_rate": {
            "$resolver": "powertools",
            "field": "sampling_rate"
        },
        "service": {
            "$resolver": "powertools",
            "field": "service"
        },
        "timestamp": {
            "$resolver": "timestamp",
            "pattern": {
                "format": "yyyy-MM-dd'T'HH:mm:ss.SSS'Z'"
            }
        },
        "xray_trace_id": {
            "$resolver": "powertools",
            "field": "xray_trace_id"
        },
        "": {
            "$resolver": "powertools"
        }
    }
    ```

You can create your own template and leverage the [PowertoolsResolver](https://github.com/aws-powertools/powertools-lambda-java/tree/v2/powertools-logging/powertools-logging-log4j/src/main/java/org/apache/logging/log4j/layout/template/json/resolver/PowertoolsResolver.java){target="_blank"} 
and any other resolver to log the desired fields with the desired format. Some examples of customization are given below:

> #### Log messages as JSON

Reviewer: Is this all a subset of "Basic Usage" and then a bit more flat? Or perhaps another "Structured keys" section?
